<!-- To create a pdf, run command "pandoc -V geometry:margin=1in
infile.md -o outfile.pdf"-->

# Tutorial 1: Speaking Notes

Hello everyone, my name is Luke, and I am your TA for this course.
Before we begin, I would like everyone to introduce yourself to me, so
that I can get to know everyone's names.

I am not sure how much Dr. Greenwood has told you about the tutorials
and assignments/exams, but I will just give an overview of the purpose
behind each.

The tutorials were designed to help you all with the assignments and
exams by walking you through what we want from you for the assignments
and what the process is for working through an assignment.  If you
have any questions, don't hesitate to ask.  I can't garauntee I will
have the answer, but I will try my best to find out the answer and
tell you in the next tutorial.  Also, as a warning, I may ask any of
you a direct question in any of the tutorials.  It's ok if you don't
know the answer, but it will help you for the assignments/exams if you
can try to work through the question and answer as best you can.  And
its really ok if you are wrong.  The point is getting you to think and
work through how you would answer the question.

The purpose of the assignments and exams are to get you critically
thinking and processing how you would answer the question given the
information you have have been provided.  We want to get you all to
take statistical information (which by the way, you don't need to know
statistics for this course) and convert that into interpretation and
application

Now, I will likely be repeating this tips and suggestions throughout
the tutorials, but I will just put them up here to get you thinking
about them.  \[Read off of slides\]

\[Move on to Julie's slides\] Now, I will be moving on to the
components of experimentation so that you get a better understanding
of how studies are conducted, how to read them and understand what is
going on.  The first component is the research question.  This is the
part of the study that is basically the lighthouse, the beacon, for
the rest of the study.  It is used to direct the methodology and
analysis, as well as the interpretation and discussion.

The second component is the experimental design.  The design of an
experiment is critically important to the analysis and interpretation
of the results.  A badly designed study will not provide very good
scientific answers to the research question.  The design needs to be
structured around a set of conditions in a way that will control other
potential effects so that we can attribute the results to the
treatment rather than to some other cause.  Some questions to ask
regarding the treatment conditions are do they appropriately test the
hypothesis?  Do the results answer the original research question?
Are there other variables that may account for the results (a
confounder by the way is a variable which may explain some of the
results of the study)?

Then there is data collection, which is pretty important as the data
may not be collected as consistently as it should be.

The interpretation of the results involves determining whether the
results were due to a chance finding, or due to a real effect or
observation.  We determine this with statistics, which use probability
and math to test how probable the results are.  This and the next
component are what you all will be mostly doing in the assignment and
exams.

After interpreting the results, you need to assimilate them into the
existing body of knowledge.  Some questions you should ask include
what do the results mean in the context of the existing knowledge
base?  How do the results fit in with the current theories?  If they
don't fit, how can you explain them theoretically?  Just out of
curiousity, can anyone tell me what a scientific theory is? (A
scientific theory is a well defined set of consistently repeated and
predictable observations and experiments.  It is the highest form of
the accumulated scientific evidence in a certain area.  The strongest
theories are those that are able to predict a range of observations,
such as the scientific theory of evolution is able to predict a range
of characteristics and behaviours in all life) The reason I ask is
that it is often confused with the philosophical meaning of theory.

Anyway, in experimental design, want to control for as much of the
conditions as possible, but obviously that is impossible.  There are
methods to minimize this, such as having everything done in the same
room, with the same temperature, with the same food, with the same
experimenter, equipment, etc.  You can also control through randomization.

Some basic experimental designs include between subjects design, where
subjects are randomized to treatment to help minimize variability.
\[Read rest of slide\]

Within-subject design or repeated measures is when all subjects are
exposed to the treatment, but at different times. \[Read slides\]

The basic statistics that you all will likely come across are mean and
standard deviation, with some basic statistical tests of
significance.  Tests for significance determine whether the response
is due to the treatment, or the independent variable, or merely due to
chance.  A significant result is when the probability value, or
p-value, is less then 0.05.

\[Read next slide\] Remember, look to the legend.  You, tell me which
groups are had the biggest difference?

\[Read next slide\] Again, look to the legend.  Your turn, which
variables had a difference between treatments?

\[Read next slide\] Note, that a significant ANOVA finding doesn't
tell you which of the groups is signficant, you need to use a post-hoc
test to determine that.  Again, you don't need to know these tests,
just a basic understanding of what they test for.  Any information in
the assignments and exams will be given to you.  But the better you
understand what the tests mean, the faster you will be able to answer
the questions and move on to the next one, which will be important for
the exam.

\[Read slide, walk through it one by one\]

\[Read next slide\] You, which one is the highest in variable A?  And
you, what can you tell me about variable C?  Also, can anyone tell me
something that is missing from this study?  (no control group)  Therefore,
when you interpret these findings, you can only relate them back to
treatment 1, and not to a normal condition.

Interpretation of results also depends on what type of study was
conducted (was it experimental or was it observational?).  If it was
experimental, the observed results are most likely to be causes and
you can state with greater certainty that what the results found are
what may be actually occurring biologically and mechanistically.  If
it is an observational study, you will need to rely more on the
statistics to determine the strength of the association.  You also
can't be as confident about the results as you can with an
experimental study.  However, observational studies are very useful in
real world contexts as experimental designs are highly controlled and
don't usually reflect real-world conditions.  So, what about the
results?

State the significant (as in the p-value or probability value is less
than 0.05) or non-significant differences and their direction.

Describe which groups were compared, and be specific. State exactly
what the results found.  Lastly, what difference was compared? How
were the variables compared, was it a change over time within the
subject or was it a difference between two groups?
